---
title: "CD103+ Kidney Dendritic Cells Protect against Crescentic GN by Maintaining IL-10-Producing Regulatory T Cells"
collection: publications
category: manuscripts
permalink: /publication/2011-08-01-Pyelonephritis_JASN
excerpt: ''
date: 2011-08-01
paperurl: 'https://doi.org/10.1681/ASN.2015080873'
citation: 'Evers BDG, Engel DR, Böhner AMC, Tittel AP, Krause TA, <b>Heuser C</b>, Garbi N, Kastenmüller W, Mack M, Tiegs G, Panzer U, Boor P, Ludwig-Portugall I, Kurts C. 2016. <b><i>J Am Soc Nephrol.</i></b> Nov 27, 2016 (11): 3368-3382.'
---

Kidney dendritic cells (DCs) regulate nephritogenic T cell responses. Most kidney DCs belong to the CD11b<sup>+</sup> subset and promote crescentic GN (cGN). The function of the CD103<sup>+</sup> subset, which represents <5% of kidney DCs, is poorly understood. We studied the role of CD103<sup>+</sup> DCs in cGN using several lines of genetically modified mice that allowed us to reduce the number of these cells. In all lines, we detected a reduction of FoxP3<sup>+</sup> intrarenal regulatory T cells (T<sub>regs</sub>), which protect against cGN. Mice lacking the transcription factor Batf3 had a more profound reduction of CD103<sup>+</sup> DCs and T<sub>regs</sub> than did the other lines used, and showed the most profound aggravation of cGN. The conditional reduction of CD103<sup>+</sup> DC numbers by 50% in Langerin-DTR mice halved T<sub>reg</sub> numbers, which did not suffice to significantly aggravate cGN. Mice lacking the cytokine Flt3L had fewer CD103<sup>+</sup> DCs and T<sub>regs</sub> than Langerin-DTR mice but exhibited milder cGN than did Batf3<sup>−/−</sup> mice presumably because proinflammatory CD11b<sup>+</sup> DCs were somewhat depleted as well. Conversely, Flt3L supplementation increased the number of CD103<sup>+</sup> DCs and T<sub>regs</sub>, but also of proinflammatory CD11b<sup>+</sup> DCs. On antibody-mediated removal of CD11b<sup>+</sup> DCs, Flt3L supplementation ameliorated cGN. Mechanistically, CD103<sup>+</sup> DCs caused cocultured T cells to differentiate into T<sub>regs</sub> and produced the chemokine CCL20, which is known to attract T<sub>regs</sub> into the kidney. Our findings show that CD103<sup>+</sup> DCs foster intrarenal FoxP3<sup>+</sup> T<sub>reg</sub> accumulation, thereby antagonizing proinflammatory CD11b<sup>+</sup> DCs. Thus, increasing CD103<sup>+</sup> DC numbers or functionality might be advantageous in cGN.
