---
title: "Ectopic LMO4 expression enhances CD8+ T cell stemness and tumor rejection by boosting IL-21-STAT3 signaling."
collection: publications
category: manuscripts
permalink: /publication/2024-08-09_LMO4-STTT
excerpt: ''
date: 2024-08-09
paperurl: 'https://doi.org/10.1038/s41392-024-01915-z'
citation: 'Schelker RC, Fioravanti J, Mastrogiovanni F, Baldwin JG, Li P, Chen P, Vadasz T, Spolski R, Rana N, <b>Heuser-Loy C</b>, Slavkovic-Lukic D, Pullugula S, Lin J-X, Oh J, Noronha P, Grandinetti P, Lecce M, Hesse L, Kocks E, Martin-Santos A, Gebhard C, Telford W, Ji Y, Restifo NP, Rehli M, Herr W, Leonard WJ, Gattinoni L. <b><i>Signal Transduct Target Ther.</i></b> Aug 9, 2024 9(1): 199.'
---

High frequencies of stem-like memory T cells in infusion products correlate with superior patient outcomes across multiple T cell therapy trials. Herein, we analyzed a published CRISPR activation screening to identify transcriptional regulators that could be harnessed to augment stem-like behavior in CD8<sup>+</sup> T cells. Using IFN-γ production as a proxy for CD8<sup>+</sup> T cell terminal differentiation, LMO4 emerged among the top hits inhibiting the development of effectors cells. Consistently, we found that Lmo4 was downregulated upon CD8<sup>+</sup> T cell activation but maintained under culture conditions facilitating the formation of stem-like T cells. By employing a synthetic biology approach to ectopically express LMO4 in antitumor CD8<sup>+</sup> T cells, we enabled selective expansion and enhanced persistence of transduced cells, while limiting their terminal differentiation and senescence. LMO4 overexpression promoted transcriptional programs regulating stemness, increasing the numbers of stem-like CD8<sup>+</sup> memory T cells and enhancing their polyfunctionality and recall capacity. When tested in syngeneic and xenograft tumor models, LMO4 overexpression boosted CD8<sup>+</sup> T cell antitumor immunity, resulting in enhanced tumor regression. Rather than directly modulating gene transcription, LMO4 bound to JAK1 and potentiated STAT3 signaling in response to IL-21, inducing the expression of target genes (*Tcf7*, *Socs3*, *Junb*, and *Zfp36*) crucial for memory responses. CRISPR/Cas9-deletion of *Stat3* nullified the enhanced memory signature conferred by LMO4, thereby abrogating the therapeutic benefit of LMO4 overexpression. These results establish *LMO4* overexpression as an effective strategy to boost CD8<sup>+</sup> T cell stemness, providing a new synthetic biology tool to bolster the efficacy of T cell-based immunotherapies.
