---
title: "Targeting ZC3H12C improves T cell persistence and antitumor function in adoptive T cell therapy"
collection: publications
category: manuscripts
permalink: /publication/2026-04-30_ZC3_bioRxiv
excerpt: ''
date: 2026-04-30
paperurl: 'https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.30.721618'
citation: 'Kavishwar G*, Perl M*, <b>Heuser-Loy C</b>, Knoedler L, Shah D, Mastrogiovanni F, Herfeld K, Noronha P, Kovács-Sautter M, Krieger M, Loipfinger S, Silveira C, Goettert S, Schelker RC, Becker M-L, Vadász T, Gerlach C, Lutzny-Geier G, Gattinoni L, Poeck H*, Schmidl C. DistincTargeting ZC3H12C improves T cell persistence and antitumor function in adoptive T cell therapy. <b><i>bioRxiv</i></b> 2026 Apr 30.'
---

Adoptive T cell therapy (ACT) has achieved remarkable clinical responses in hematologic malignancies  but  remains  limited by progressive  T  cell  dysfunction under  chronic  antigen stimulation. Here, we identify <i>ZC3H12C</i> as a conserved feature of dysfunctional T cells and show that its disruption enhances the durability and antitumor activity of engineered T cells. By  integrating single-cell chromatin accessibility and transcriptomic profiling of human tumor-infiltrating  lymphocytes (TILs), we identified the <i>ZC3H12C</i> locus as selectively remodeled in exhausted T cells. <i>ZC3H12C</i> induction is largely absent across acute T cell activation contexts, indicating regulation that is specific to chronic antigen-driven dysfunction. Genetic disruption of <i>ZC3H12C</i> improves T cell expansion, cytotoxicity, and expression of effector molecules during repeated <i>in vitro</i> stimulation, translating into enhanced tumor control <i>in vivo</i> across both T cell receptor (TCR) and chimeric antigen receptor (CAR) T cell therapy platforms. Improved efficacy is observed in hematologic, solid, and metastatic tumor models and is accompanied by increased T cell persistence. Further, <i>ZC3H12C</i> is  enriched  in clinical pre-infusion CAR T cell products associated with non-response. Together, these findings identify <i>ZC3H12C</i> as a T cell dysfunction-specific target to improve ACT performance.
